PDF page 409
Chapter 42

HMC Tuning Interfaces

HMC tuning determines which frozen kernels are suitable for further sampling. For each
declared trajectory length L, BayesFilter measures proposed step sizes ϵ, independently
verifies the surviving pairs, and retains every pair that passes. A failed pair can motivate
another measured proposal. A passing pair does not end the search or establish posterior
convergence.


42.1       One candidate-set procedure
The public functions tune_hmc_kernel and tune_fixed_transport_hmc_kernel share
HMCTuningCandidateSetController. Both return HMCTypedCandidateSetRun, whose
result contains the full HMCTuningCandidateSetResult. Their preparation differs with
the target and coordinates; their candidate scheduling and retention do not.
    Ordinary HMCKernelTuningConfig prepares a windowed mass matrix or an explicit
identity metric. FixedTransportHMCKernelTuningConfig prepares identity mass in the
coordinates of a reconstructable frozen transport. A caller with already prepared geom-
etry supplies HMCControllerConfig and the numerical binding’s typed_adapter. The
conditional TensorFlowHMCKernelTuningConfig proposal-field route also uses the shared
scheduler, but retains its weaker mechanics authority.
    The capability registry HMC_TUNING_INTERFACE_CAPABILITIES identifies the supported
target and coordinate combinations. Chain runners, stage helpers, discovery routines,
and historical selectors cannot independently issue new candidate-set tuning evidence.
Unsupported legacy runner customizations fail before execution. Historical single-kernel
results remain readable, with their original identities; they are not the result of the current
procedure.
            Listing 42.1: Inspecting supported target and coordinate routes.
"""Select an HMC tuning route from BayesFilter’s capability registry."""

from __future__ import annotations

import sys
from pathlib import Path

REPOSITORY_ROOT = Path(__file__).resolve().parents[2]
sys.path.insert(0, str(REPOSITORY_ROOT))

from bayesfilter.inference import (


                                            391


PDF page 413
42.3. BROAD SEARCH, REPAIRS, AND FURTHER EVIDENCE                                       395

Here starts are represented as row vectors. Caller order is preserved. A diagnostic may
explicitly replicate one start; candidate preparation requires its declared four-chain bank.
Affine metric windows use L = 1 and the configured adaptation counts. Their proposals
receive fresh fixed-kernel measurements.
    The ordinary preparation config and numerical binding default to GPU/XLA exe-
cution. TensorFlow memory growth is configured before device initialization. Small
CPU/non-XLA checks are explicit reference or debugging exceptions. Execution policy
does not qualify an arbitrary target: the binding still checks its full-chain capability and
the consumer must establish value/score fidelity.


42.3      Broad search, repairs, and further evidence
The ordinary convenience grid is L ∈ {3, 5, 9, 13, 18, 25}, subject to the explicit maximum.
An explicit epsilon_by_l may supply several proposals at each L; initial_epsilon is
a warm start when no grid is supplied. Every pair is measured independently. A shared
numeric proposal at two values of L transfers no acceptance evidence between them. The
final-metric epsilon bound from operational preparation is a proposal safety bound, not
cross-L qualification. Its final coordinate and metric signatures are retained with the
bound, and direct preparation bindings intersect the requested domain with it.
    The automatic preparation translation enables one pilot per L and one bounded refine-
ment round. A direct controller config can disable these optional stages for an explicitly
supplied grid. A pilot proposes a frozen pair; measurement and fresh verification qual-
ify it. Refinement applies declared epsilon factors and additional L hypotheses to every
surviving family. Exact pairs are deduplicated, and all proposals remain subject to candi-
date and work limits. The reciprocal convenience factors (0.8, 1.25) are hypotheses about
useful nearby proposals, not universal numerical optima.
    Work proceeds in closed cohorts. Every admitted peer receives its reserved stage
before a repair child enters the next cohort. A first pass does not remove later candi-
dates. Directional evidence creates an immutable child with the same L, mass, target,
coordinates, and initial bank. The child has a new epsilon and must receive its own mea-
surement and verification. A parent may fail movement because an oversized step rejects
nearly everything; that promotion veto does not suppress a supported smaller-epsilon
repair. A trajectory alert can propose only declared additional L values, as separate
candidates. It never silently changes an existing candidate’s L.
    The distinction between proposal and evidence matters for fixed-length HMC. For a
transition from x, the acceptance probability is

                         a(ϵ, L | x) = E[min{1, exp(−∆H)} | x] .                     (42.3)

The mean computed Metropolis probability and the realized accept/reject rate are dif-
ferent finite-sample estimates of this quantity: conditional on a Metropolis probability
a, a fresh uniform accept/reject draw has expectation a. Neither estimate measures con-
vergence. For the unit harmonic oscillator, one leapfrog matrix has determinant one and
trace 2 − ϵ2 . In the stable range its conjugate eigenvalues therefore give the phase

                         ϑ(ϵ) = arccos(1 − ϵ2 /2),     0 < ϵ < 2.                    (42.4)

The trajectory phase is Lϑ(ϵ). Near a return phase, acceptance can be high with little
net movement. A multiplicative epsilon repair is thus another hypothesis to measure. On


PDF page 419
42.7. PERSISTENCE, RESOURCE LIMITS, AND REPLAY                                      401

42.7      Persistence, resource limits, and replay
verified_candidate_ids retains every verified member with no implicit nominee. viable_
candidate_ids also includes validating and terminally inconclusive candidates; their in-
dividual states must be inspected. A verified member remains usable when another
candidate exhausts its budget, unless the scope itself is invalid. Descriptive differences
among members do not establish a statistically supported ranking.
    A fresh output directory preserves execution_spec.json, immutable numerical ev-
idence and chunk files, and the atomic tuning_checkpoint.json. All observations, in-
cluding failed measurements and zero-verified searches, are retained. Complete results use
candidate_set_result.json and are never overwritten. Resource failures pause with
their reason; unexpected exceptions preserve state and propagate. Optional diagnostic
errors cannot erase completed numerical evidence.
    resume_hmc_candidate_set_tuning reconstructs the same geometry, policy, evi-
dence, candidates and work queue using the original target. It checks source and tar-
get drift, tensor checksums, numerical versions, and scope identity. Position-field me-
chanics separately preserve preparation and observations for resume_position_field_
candidate_tuning, which also requires the original runner binding. Their controller_
checkpoint.json also references immutable completed chunks, permitting restart within
a longer evidence stage. Controller-only reload cannot create missing numerical evidence.
    Call budgets count attempted work. Candidate reservations protect mandatory stages;
extensions and retries can use remaining free budget. A separate transition-times-(L + 1)
estimate accounts conservatively for gradient work, and elapsed time includes reported
preparation. Numerical chunks are bounded by chunk_max_results, whose convenience
default is 256. Time limits are checked between chunks; Python cannot preempt a native
operation or compilation. The first-call timing includes any tracing/compilation rather
than pretending that it measures steady-state kernel cost.
    Select a member by explicit ID and supply its result and numerical binding to build_
retained_bound_hmc_archive_runner_from_candidate_set_result. The two frozen-
kernel variants share these checks, with the claim-eligible variant additionally requiring
actual GPU/XLA evidence. A child’s own passing verification is required; its failed an-
cestor need not pass. Export with runner.export(path) and reconstruct with load_
hmc_candidate_retained_runner(path,adapter=original_target). Fresh retained
blocks continue from the verified or preceding endpoint with frozen settings and fresh
seeds. Tuning draws remain excluded. runner.run_sequential connects the explicitly
chosen member to the existing cumulative posterior controller, with diagnostics trans-
formed into model coordinates. Posterior rejection does not change tuning membership.
    Retained-member files currently embed their evidence and check predecessor history.
These mechanics tests do not qualify target-scale memory, restart latency, posterior con-
vergence, or scientific validity. Consumer evidence must also establish complete target/-
data/prior identity and any intermediate integrator telemetry required by that target.
                   Listing 42.5: Ordinary candidate-set invocation.
"""Small CPU/reference candidate-set example; no posterior or ranking claim."""
from __future__ import annotations
import os
import sys
from pathlib import Path
os.environ.setdefault("CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES", "-1")
os.environ.setdefault("TF_FORCE_GPU_ALLOW_GROWTH", "true")
