                                         BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH LATENT HAMILTONIAN NEURAL
                                                             NETWORKS∗
                                             SOMAYAJULU L. N. DHULIPALA† , YIFENG CHE† , AND MICHAEL D. SHIELDS‡

                                              Abstract. When sampling for Bayesian inference, one popular approach is to use Hamiltonian
                                         Monte Carlo (HMC) and specifically the No-U-Turn Sampler (NUTS) which automatically decides
                                         the end time of the Hamiltonian trajectory. However, HMC and NUTS can require numerous numer-
                                         ical gradients of the target density, and can prove slow in practice. We propose Hamiltonian neural
                                         networks (HNNs) with HMC and NUTS for solving Bayesian inference problems. Once trained,
                                         HNNs do not require numerical gradients of the target density during sampling. Moreover, they
arXiv:2208.06120v2 [cs.LG] 24 Oct 2022




                                         satisfy important properties such as perfect time reversibility and Hamiltonian conservation, mak-
                                         ing them well-suited for use within HMC and NUTS because stationarity can be shown. We also
                                         propose an HNN extension called latent HNNs (L-HNNs), which are capable of predicting latent
                                         variable outputs. Compared to HNNs, L-HNNs offer improved expressivity and reduced integration
                                         errors. Finally, we employ L-HNNs in NUTS with an online error monitoring scheme to prevent
                                         sample degeneracy in regions of low probability density. We demonstrate L-HNNs in NUTS with on-
                                         line error monitoring on several examples involving complex, heavy-tailed, and high-local-curvature
                                         probability densities. Overall, L-HNNs in NUTS with online error monitoring satisfactorily inferred
                                         these probability densities. Compared to traditional NUTS, L-HNNs in NUTS with online error
                                         monitoring required 1–2 orders of magnitude fewer numerical gradients of the target density and
                                         improved the effective sample size (ESS) per gradient by an order of magnitude.

                                            Key words. Bayesian Inference, Physics-based learning, Deep neural networks, Hamiltonian
                                         Monte Carlo, Symplectic integration, No-u-turn sampler

                                            AMS subject classifications. 60J22, 68T07, 65C05, 37Jxx, 62F15



                                              1. Introduction. Bayesian inference is a principal method for parameter cali-
                                         bration and uncertainty quantification in many scientific and engineering fields. Since
                                         closed-form solutions usually do not exist for practical Bayesian inference problems,
                                         Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms are employed to sample from the
                                         target probability density. While random-walk MCMC algorithms are popular, they
                                         have poor scalability with the number of dimensions, and can feature large serial cor-
                                         relations between the samples. Therefore, algorithms under the Hamiltonian Monte
                                         Carlo (HMC) [18] framework (including the No-U-Turn Sampler [NUTS] [12]) are
                                         often employed. HMC methods simulate Hamiltonian dynamics to propose new sam-
                                         ples, instead of drawing them randomly, which can drastically improve the sampling
                                         acceptance rate. However, the HMC class of algorithms can require numerous numer-
                                         ical gradients of the target density, which are computationally expensive, especially if
                                         the likelihood function involves iterating over a large dataset or calling a costly com-
                                         putational model. This paper proposes latent Hamiltonian neural networks (HNNs)
                                         [10] with HMC and NUTS for solving Bayesian inference problems. Once trained,
                                         latent HNNs do not require evaluating numerical gradients of the target density while
                                         sampling, and can therefore lead to computational gains over traditional HMC and
                                         NUTS.


                                           ∗ Code available at: https://github.com/IdahoLabResearch/BIhNNs.

                                              Funding: This research is supported through the INL Laboratory Directed Research & Devel-
                                         opment (LDRD) Program under DOE Idaho Operations Office Contract DE-AC07-05ID14517.
                                            † Idaho National Laboratory,      Idaho Falls, ID 83415, USA (Som.Dhulipala@inl.gov,
                                         Yifeng.Che@inl.gov).
                                            ‡ Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA (michael.shields@jhu.edu).

                                                                                         1
2                             S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.


     1.1. Literature review. Owing to the high computational cost of Bayesian
inference, machine learning have garnered considerable interest to accelerate this
process. For example, Che et al. [6] and Dhulipala et al. [7] utilized Gaussian
processes to accelerate random-walk MCMC by replacing computationally expen-
sive models for the likelihood evaluation. Gradient-based inference methods (e.g.,
Langevin dynamics sampling and HMC) have better scalability than random-walk
MCMC, and machine learning techniques are being employed to accelerate these meth-
ods as well. For example, Gu et al. [11] trained neural networks that take as inputs
the current position and gradient of the log-likelihood and predict the new position in
the Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA). Li et al. [15] proposed neural
networks that learn the log-likelihood, and applied neural network gradients instead
of the target density gradients in an HMC. Levy et al. [14] devised neural networks
that take the log-likelihood as the input and predict the transition kernel in an HMC,
which then showed improved performance over traditional HMC for complex cases
such as multi-modal densities. One thing all these efforts for accelerating Bayesian
inference have in common is the use of purely data-driven machine learning models.
Moreover, although neural-network-aided HMC has shown improved performance over
traditional HMC, Hoffman and Gelman [12] demonstrated NUTS to be at least an or-
der of magnitude more efficient than conventional HMC (in terms of effective sample
size [ESS] [23] per gradient), even without relying on machine learning. The efficiency
of NUTS over HMC, MALA, and random-walk MCMC has also been demonstrated
in many other studies (e.g., [19]).
     To efficiently predict the behavior of dynamical systems, recent studies have in-
vestigated physics-based neural networks. Greydanus et al. [10] proposed HNNs for
learning Hamiltonian systems in an unsupervised fashion through a loss function that
accounts for Hamilton’s equations. HNNs have interesting properties such as perfect
time reversibility and Hamiltonian conservation, and thus proved superior in perfor-
mance compared to data-driven neural networks and black-box ordinary differential
equation (ODE) solvers such as neural ODEs [22]. More recently, newer architec-
tures to learn Hamiltonian systems have been proposed. Physics-informed HNNs
[17], Symplectic ODE-Net [25], and symplectic neural networks [13] are examples of
such architectures. Efforts along these lines, however, were all driven from the stand-
point of efficiently identifying and learning dynamical systems, rather than solving
Bayesian inference problems. As such, the example applications that these studies
have demonstrated correspond to classical mechanics problems such as the behavior
of a n-pendulum, the gravitational attraction between bodies (e.g., planets), and the
dynamics of predator-prey systems, etc.

     1.2. Contributions of this paper. We propose to use HNNs for Bayesian in-
ference problems. As summarized in Figure 1, once trained, HNNs do not require
numerical gradients of the target density. As discussed earlier, HNNs satisfy impor-
tant properties such as perfect time reversibility and Hamiltonian conservation, which
make them amenable for HMC sampling, since stationarity, an important condition
satisfied by MCMC samplers, can be shown. We also propose an HNN extension
called latent HNNs (L-HNNs), which use latent variable outputs to improve the ex-
pressivity of HNNs. L-HNNs have reduced integration errors when simulating the
Hamiltonian dynamics, and show better performance than HNNs when sampling for
Bayesian inference. Moreover, given that the performance of NUTS has generally
proven superior to that of HMC, MALA, and random-walk MCMC, we propose to
use L-HNNs in NUTS with an online error monitoring scheme. This error monitoring
                                      BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                                                           3

scheme reverts to using numerical gradients of the target density for a few samples
whenever L-HNN integration errors are large, which may be the result of inadequate
training data in certain regions of the uncertainty space. Overall, the online error
monitoring scheme prevents sampling degeneracy when L-HNNs are used in NUTS.
In summary, the novel contributions of this paper are:
• Use of HNNs for Bayesian inference problems without requiring numerous numerical
  gradients of the target density.
• Development of latent variable outputs in HNNs (L-HNNs) for improved expressiv-
  ity and reduced integration errors when simulating Hamiltonian dynamics.
• Use of L-HNNs in NUTS with an online error monitoring scheme to prevent sam-
  pling degeneracy.

                                                                                       Inference with Hamiltonian Monte
                 Bayesian inference                Required posterior distribution
                                                                                      Carlo-No U Turn Sampler (expensive)

                Likelihood (computational
                   model; large dataset)
                                                         Prob. density




                                                                                             Momentum
           𝑓 𝒒 𝒚 ∝ 𝑓 𝒚 𝒒 𝑓(𝒒)

                                  Prior
                                                                          𝒒
                                                                                                        Position



                                                                                         (L)-HNNs efficiently sample the
           (L)-HNNs learn the Hamiltonian            (L)-HNNs satisfy important
                                                                                         posterior uncertainties without
                      dynamics                        mathematical properties
                                                                                          gradients of the target density

                                                                                         Initial
                                                                                       conditions
                                                    1.          Conservation of the
                                                                Hamiltonian

                                                    2.          Time reversibility                                 Required
                                                                                                                   posterior




Fig. 1: Schematic of the use of (L)-HNNs for efficient Bayesian inference. Once
trained, (L)-HNNs do not require numerical gradients of the posterior distribu-
tion—which are expensive to compute—for sampling.

   2. Preliminaries. This section provides a brief background on Hamiltonian dy-
namics simulation and HMC sampling.
     2.1. Simulating Hamiltonian dynamics. The basics of Hamiltonian dynam-
ics and its numerical simulation using time integration schemes have been discussed
thoroughly (e.g., [18, 16]). If q and p represent the position and momentum vectors,
respectively, the Hamiltonian of a system is defined as:

(2.1)                                       H(zz = {qq , p }) = U (qq ) + K(pp)

where z is a concatenated vector of the vectors q and p , U (.) is the potential energy,
and K(.) is the kinetic energy. Hamilton’s equations are given by:
                                                    dzz
(2.2)                                                   = J ∇H(zz )
                                                    dt
where ∇ is the gradient operator, and if d is the dimensionality of the system, J is a
2d × 2d matrix given by:
                                                   
                                      0 d×d I d×d
(2.3)                          J =
                                     −II d×d 0 d×d
4                                 S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.


where I is an identity matrix and 0 is a zero matrix. The equations in Equation (2.2)
can be expressed explicitly in each of the d dimensions as:
                             dqi   ∂H
                                 =
                              dt   ∂pi
(2.4)                                           ∀       i ∈ [1, . . . , d].
                             dpi    ∂H
                                 =−
                             dt     ∂qi

Equation (2.2) is a coupled first-order ODE with general solution given by:
                                                Z T
(2.5)                        z (T ) = z (0) +           J ∇H(zz ) dt
                                                    0

     Hamiltonian dynamics is numerically simulated using a symplectic time integrator
[4, 5]. A symplectic time integrator is better suited than other integrators (e.g., Runge-
Kutta) because it satisfies two key properties: (1) time reversibility and (2) volume
preservation in the {qq , p } phase space. Both properties are critical to accurately
simulating Hamiltonian dynamics over long trajectories. This paper uses the basic
symplectic integrator known as the synchronized leapfrog integration scheme. It is first
assumed that the mass matrix associated with the kinetic energy K(pp) is a diagonal
matrix and thus K(pp) can be expressed as:
                                     d
                                     X p2   i
(2.6)                     K(pp) ∝                   ∀      i ∈ [1, . . . , d]
                                      i=1
                                          2mi

where mi is the mass associated with dimension i. In the synchronized leapfrog
integration scheme, the position in dimension i (qi ) is first updated by:

                                 ∆t          ∆t2                    ∆t          ∆t2 ∂H
(2.7)   qi (t + ∆t) = qi (t) +      pi (t) +     ṗi (t) = qi (t) +    pi (t) −
                                 mi          2mi                    mi          2mi ∂qi (t)

where ∆t is the integration time step and ṗi (t) is replaced with − ∂q∂H
                                                                        i (t)
                                                                              from Equation
(2.4). Next, the momentum in dimension i (pi ) is updated by:
                                                                                     
                          ∆t                                 ∆t    ∂H             ∂H
(2.8) pi (t+∆t) = pi (t)+      ṗi (t)+ṗi (t+∆t) = pi (t)−                +
                          2                                   2   ∂qi (t) ∂qi (t + ∆t)

where ṗi (t) is again replaced with − ∂q∂H
                                          i (t)
                                                from Equation (2.4). The positions and
momenta across all the dimensions are iteratively updated at each time step until a
specified end time T is reached.
    2.2. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. The fundamentals of HMC are discussed
thoroughly in several resources (e.g. [18, 3, 24]). The HMC algorithm aims to sample
from a joint probability distribution of the following form:
                                                                    
(2.9)                   f (zz = {qq , p }) ∝ exp − H(zz = {qq , p })

Using the definition of the Hamiltonian from Equation (2.1), the joint distribution
can be explicitly expressed to include contributions from the potential and kinetic
energies as:
                                                             
(2.10)                f ({qq , p}) ∝ exp − U (qq ) exp − K(pp)
                          BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                                   5

The potential energy U (qq ) is defined as the negative logarithm of the likelihood func-
tion times the prior distribution:
                                                              
(2.11)                          U (qq ) ∝ − log L(qq |D) g(qq )

where L(qq |D) is the likelihood function of the data D, and g(qq ) is the prior distri-
bution. K(pp) is also defined to simulate Hamiltonian dynamics. In the basic HMC
algorithm, p is assumed to follow a multivariate Gaussian with a diagonal covariance
matrix M . M has d diagonal components: mi ∀ i ∈ [1, . . . , d]. K(pp) is then defined
as the negative logarithm of a multivariate Gaussian, and is given by Equation (2.6).
This definition of M implies that the Hamiltonian dynamics operates in a Euclidean
space. In contrast, if M is non-diagonal but symmetric positive definite and depends
on q , then the Hamiltonian dynamics operates in a Riemannian space [9], and the
associated Monte Carlo algorithm is called Riemannian HMC.
    In the basic HMC algorithm, p is drawn from a multivariate Gaussian with a
diagonal M , Hamiltonian dynamics is simulated given T and the starting position
vector q 0 , and the {qq , p } vector at the end of the time integration serves as the
Markov chain proposal {qq ∗ , p ∗ }. This proposed sample is accepted as the next sample
with the following probability:

                   α = min 1, exp H({qq i−1 , p i−1 }) − H({qq ∗ , p ∗ })
                                                                        
(2.12)

where {qq i−1 , p i−1 } is an accepted sample from the previous iteration of HMC.
    3. Sampling with L-HNNs. Greydanus et al. [10] introduced HNNs as un-
supervised machine learning architectures to learn Hamiltonian systems. Specifically,
HNNs learn the gradients of the Hamiltonian which can be further used in an time inte-
gration scheme to predict the Hamiltonian trajectories. Given training data {qq , p }, nu-
                                                                                 q ∆p  p
merical gradients are first computed to give the numerical time derivatives { ∆q
                                                                               ∆t , ∆t },
per Hamilton’s equations in (2.4). For some network parameters θ , the HNN-predicted
Hamiltonians (i.e., Hθ ) and their corresponding gradients (i.e., ∂H      ∂Hθ
                                                                    p and ∂qq ) are also
                                                                   ∂p
                                                                     θ


computed. HNNs optimize the network parameters θ to minimize the following loss
function:
                                ∂Hθ    ∆qq                 ∂Hθ    ∆pp
(3.1)                    L=          −     +           −        −
                                 ∂pp   ∆t                   ∂qq   ∆t
Algorithm 3.1 summarizes the procedure for training HNNs. During the evaluation
phase, HNNs predict the numerical gradients of the Hamiltonian { ∂H        θ
                                                                             , ∂Hθ }, without
                                                                       ∂pp ∂qq
explicit calls to the joint density f ({qq , p }) ∝ exp − H({qq , p }) . Therefore, during
evaluation, HNNs require    neither the  numerical gradients of the potential energy
function U (qq ) ∝ − log L(qq |D) g(qq ) nor explicit calls to it. This by itself leads to
computational gains since these gradients only need to be evaluated during HNN
training, which requires comparatively small data sets. Moreover, evaluating the
likelihood L(.) in U (qq ) can require calling an expensive computational model or a large
dataset whose numerical gradients are very expensive to evaluate. Thus, avoiding
numerical gradients of U (qq ) can lead to even more computational gains. Finally,
gradients predicted by HNNs can be used to solve the following initial value problem
to predict Hamiltonian dynamics:
                                                Z T
(3.2)                        z (T ) = z (0) +         J ∇Hθ (zz ) dt
                                                 0
6                                S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.


where ∇Hθ (zz ) = { ∂H    ∂Hθ
                      p , ∂qq } are predicted by HNNs. Equation (3.2) can be nu-
                     ∂p
                       θ


merically solved using the synchronized leapfrog symplectic integrator, as presented
in Algorithm 3.2. The gradients of the Hamiltonian are provided by HNNs (i.e.,
line 5 in Algorithm 3.2) rather than relying on numerical gradient evaluations of the
Hamiltonian function.

Algorithm 3.1 Hamiltonian neural network training
    1: HNN parameters: θ ; Training data: {q
                                           q, p}
                                                 ∆qq         p
                                                            ∆p
    2: Evaluate gradients of the training data ∆t and ∆t
    3: Initialize HNN parameters θ
    4: Compute HNN Hamiltonian Hθ
                               ∂H         ∂H
    5: Compute Hθ gradients ∂ppθ and − ∂qqθ
                            ∂H     ∆qq         ∂H       p
                                                       ∆p
    6: Compute loss L = || ∂ppθ − ∆t || + || − ∂qqθ − ∆t ||
    7: Minimize L with respect to θ




Algorithm 3.2 Hamiltonian neural networks evaluation in leapfrog integration
    1: Hamiltonian: H; Initial conditions: z (0) = {qq (0), p (0)}; Dimensions: d; Steps:
    N ; End time: T
           T
 2: ∆t = N
 3: for j = 0 : N − 1 do
 4:   t = j ∆t
                                             ∂Hθ
 5:   Compute HNN output gradient ∂q          q (t)
 6:   for i = 1 : d do
                                ∆t            ∆t2 ∂Hθ
 7:      qi (t + ∆t) = qi (t) + mi
                                   pi (t) − 2m    i ∂qi (t)
 8:   end for
                                                ∂Hθ
 9:   Compute HNN output gradient ∂qq (t+∆t)
10:   for i = 1 : d do                                     
                                ∆t     ∂Hθ          ∂Hθ
11:      pi (t + ∆t) = pi (t) − 2     ∂qi (t) + ∂qi (t+∆t)
12:   end for
13: end for


     To generate the training data for HNNs and to further use them to solve Equation
(3.2), Greydanus et al. [10] relied on the Runge-Kutta scheme. A noteworthy differ-
ence in our approach is that we rely on the synchronized leapfrog integrator. Being
a symplectic integrator, synchronized leapfrog leads to stable Hamiltonian dynamics
and better training data quality under relatively larger time steps. In addition, for
the numerical evaluation of Equation (3.2) using HNNs, our initial studies indicated
that synchronized leapfrog improves Hamiltonian conservation, which is key to an
effective sampling scheme, as discussed in Section 3.3.

     3.1. Latent outputs in HNNs. The HNNs proposed by Greydanus et al. [10]
take as inputs the {qq , p } coordinates during the forward pass, and return a scalar
output value (i.e., the “Hamiltonian” [Hθ ]). Gradients are computed with respect to
this Hamiltonian value and the loss function in Equation (3.1) is minimized. However,
for Bayesian inference, it may be more beneficial for the HNNs to predict d latent
variables λi {i ∈ 1, . . . , d} denoted by the vector λ, where d is the dimensionality of
                           BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                                7

the uncertainty space. The architecture of L-HNNs is formally defined as:

                               w p−1 u p−1 + b p−1 ), {p ∈ 1, . . . , P }
                       u p = φ(w
(3.3)
                       λ = w P uP + bP

where P is the number of hidden layers indexed by p, u p are the outputs of the
hidden layer p, w p and b p are the weights and biases, respectively, φ(.) is the nonlinear
activation function, and u 0 are the inputs z = {qq , p }. The Hamiltonian computed by
L-HNNs is defined as:
                                                   d
                                                   X
(3.4)                                      Hθ =          λi
                                                   i=1

Gradients are then computed with respect to the Hamiltonian in Equation (3.4) and
the loss function in Equation (3.1) is minimized. Through these latent variables,
L-HNNs have more degrees of freedom and expressivity than traditional HNNs, po-
tentially leading to reduced integration errors when predicting the Hamiltonian dy-
namics. As a result, L-HNNs can show improved sampling efficiency relative to HNNs.
A comparison between the performance of L-HNNs and HNNs is presented in Section
5 for a 3-D Rosenbrock density function.
    3.2. Sampling. HMC sampling using L-HNNs proceeds in similar fashion to
traditional HMC. The key difference is that, given the initial conditions {qq (0), p (0)},
the Hamiltonian dynamics is approximated using L-HNNs via Algorithm 3.2 rather
than through direct integration. Once the new proposal {qq ∗ , p ∗ } is simulated, the
Metropolis acceptance criterion is used to decide whether to accept this proposal,
based on the conservation of the Hamiltonian:

               {qq i , p i } ← {qq ∗ , p ∗ } with probability α
(3.5)
               where α = min{1, exp H({qq i−1 , p i−1 }) − H({qq ∗ , p ∗ }) }
                                                                           

This procedure is summarized in Algorithm 3.3.

Algorithm 3.3 L-HNNs in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
 1: Hamiltonian:    H = U (qq ) + K(pp); Samples: M; Starting sample: {qq 0 , p 0 }; End
    time for trajectory: T ; Steps: N ; Dimensions: d
 2: for i = 1 : M do
 3:   p (0) ∼ N (00, I d )
 4:   q (0) = q i−1
 5:   Compute {qq ∗ , p ∗ } = {qq (T ), p (T )} with Algorithm
                                                             3.2
 6:   α = min{1, exp H({qq i−1 , p i−1 }) − H({qq ∗ , p ∗ }) }
 7:   With probability α, set {qq i , p i } ← {qq ∗ , p ∗ }
 8: end for


    For a simple demonstration of using L-HNNs in HMC, we consider the following
1-D Gaussian mixture density, which has modes at +1 and −1, both having a standard
deviation of 0.35:
                                           !                     !
                                  (q − 1)2              (q + 1)2
(3.6)            f (q) ∝ 0.5 exp             + 0.5 exp
                                 2 × 0.352             2 × 0.352
 8                                                  S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.


 The L-HNNs have three hidden layers with 100 neurons each. To generate the training
 data, we simulated the Hamiltonian dynamics for 20 samples, each with T = 20 units.
 The number of leapfrog steps was 20 per unit, meaning that ∆t = 0.05. The initial
 condition for the first sample was set to zeros. The initial conditions for the rest
 of the samples were defined as follows: (1) position q(0) was the final position from
 the previous sample, and (2) momentum p(0) was drawn randomly from a standard
 Gaussian distribution. In total, the training of L-HNNs took 8, 000 numerical gradient
 evaluations.
      Figure 2a compares the {q, p} phase space between L-HNNs and numerical gradi-
 ents for several initial momentum values p(0) and identical initial position q(0) = 0.
 Note that the phase space plots predicted using numerical gradients and L-HNNs
 compare satisfactorily. We further performed HMC using numerical gradients and
 L-HNNs to generate 5,000 samples from the distribution in Equation (3.6), with the
 first 1,000 considered as burn-in. Each sample had an end time of T = 5 units, with
 each unit being discretized into 20 steps (i.e., ∆t = 0.05). The histogram plots com-
 pare well between traditional HMC (Figure 2b) and HMC using HNNs (Figure 2c).
 Moreover, for this simple example, using L-HNNs for HMC requires only the 8000
 numerical gradients of the target density from the training, whereas HMC required
 500,000 numerical gradients for the same number of samples (a 98.4% reduction).

               4                                         500                                     500
               3
                                                         400                                     400
               2
Momentum (p)




               1                                         300                                     300
                       Numerical gradients
                                                 Count




                                                                                         Count




               0       L-HNNs
               1                                         200                                     200
               2
               3                                         100                                     100
               4                                           0                                       0
                   2   1     0       1       2                 2   1      0      1   2                 2   1      0      1   2
                        Position (q)                                     Value                                   Value

                         (a)                                           (b)                                     (c)
 Fig. 2: (a) {q, p} phase space plot corresponding to different energy levels. (b) and (c)
 Histogram of samples from a 1-D Gaussian mixture density using traditional HMC and
 L-HNNs in HMC, respectively. L-HNNs in HMC requires only 1.6% of the numerical
 gradients of target density required by traditional HMC.
     3.3. Discussion of stationarity. MCMC samplers should be stationary with
 respect to the target density π. The formal theorem on the stationarity of an ideal-
 ized HMC sampler, in which no numerical errors are introduced when simulating the
 Hamiltonian dynamics, is presented in Theorem 3.1.
     Theorem 3.1 (Stationarity [24]). Let f : Rd → R be a differentiable function.
 Let ∆t > 0 be the step size of the idealized HMC. Let ψ∆t (qq , p ) denote the position in
 the phase space at step ∆t. Suppose {qq , p } is a sample from the density
                                                                         1
                                         π(qq , p ) ∝ exp − U (qq ) exp − kppk2 )
                                                                                 
                                                                         2
 Then, the density of ψ∆t (qq , p) is π for any ∆t > 0. Moreover, the density of ψ∆t (qq , ξ ),
 where ξ ∼ N (00, I d ), is also π. Thus, the idealized HMC preserves π.
     Proof. The proof of the theorem relies on the Hamiltonian dynamics being time-
 reversible and the Hamiltonian being conserved. The formal proof is presented in
                                     BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                                       9

Vishnoi [24].
     As discussed in Greydanus et al. [10], the Hamiltonian dynamics simulated by
HNNs and L-HNNs are perfectly time-reversible as a result of Liouville’s theorem.
This feature can also be seen in Figure 3a, wherein two Hamiltonian trajectories for
the 1-D Gaussian mixture density are simulated in forward and reverse time using L-
HNNs. Both trajectories have the same initial position in forward time, but different
initial momenta. To simulate the reverse-time trajectories, the final {q, p} values at
the end time during forward integration were used as the initial conditions. Backward
time integration was then performed using L-HNNs.
     By virtue of their loss function (Equation (3.1)), L-HNNs can also conserve the
Hamiltonian in an approximate sense. The degree to which the Hamiltonian is con-
served may depend on the target distribution of interest and the training data. For
example, Figure 3b presents the Hamiltonian evolution with time for the 1-D Gaussian
mixture density, considering several initial conditions {q(0), p(0)} using ∆t = 0.05.
Overall, the Hamiltonian values are seen to be approximately constant with time.
For comparison, the Hamiltonian values obtained using traditional numerical gradi-
ents are also presented, and are also approximately constant with time. Owing to
some numerical errors in the Hamiltonian conservation, and in line with the tradi-
tional HMC procedure, the use of a Metropolis acceptance criterion in Equation (3.5)
is important to ensure stationarity when using HNNs in HMC. The Metropolis ac-
ceptance criterion leaves the target density π invariant, as discussed in Roberts and
Rosenthal [21].

                                         Forward time                              Numerical gradients
                  2                      Reverse time                 10           L-HNNs
                  1
                                                        Hamiltonian
   Position (q)




                                                                       8
                  0

                  1                                                    6
                  2
                                                                       4
                      0   1   2          3    4     5                      0   1   2          3   4   5
                                  Time                                                 Time
                              (a)                                                  (b)
Fig. 3: (a) Time reversibility of the L-HNNs in predicting the Hamiltonian dynamics
under two different sets of initial conditions, given a 1-D Gaussian mixture density.
(b) Conservation of the Hamiltonian for different energy levels given a 1-D Gaussian
mixture density.

    4. No-U-Turn Sampling (NUTS) with L-HNNs. Traditional HMC re-
quires the end time T to be specified. For all but simple problems, specifying T
is not only challenging but also has considerable impact on HMC sampler perfor-
mance diagnostics (e.g., the serial auto-correlations between the samples). Hoffman
and Gelman [12] introduced the NUTS algorithm to automatically decide T for each
sample in HMC. In summary, NUTS works by building the set of candidate {qq , p}
states B, using a binary tree. At each iteration, the tree length is doubled by inte-
grating randomly in either the forward or reverse direction. Out of the states B, a
subset of states C is selected so as not to violate the detailed balance condition. A
10                              S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.


slice variable u is often used in NUTS to facilitate the selection of subset C. The
doubling procedure for building the binary tree is stopped when a u-turn is made, as
defined by the criterion:

(4.1)                  (qq + − q − ) · p − < 0 or (qq + − q − ) · p + < 0

where {qq + , p + } and {qq − , p − } are, respectively, the leftmost and rightmost states of
a sub-tree in the binary tree. The doubling procedure may also be stopped when the
integration error while simulating the Hamiltonian dynamics exceeds a threshold, as
defined by:
                                          
(4.2)                          ε ≡ H q , p + ln u > ∆max

where {qq , p } is the current candidate state and ∆max is a threshold recommended
by Hoffman and Gelman to be set to 1,000 [12]. From the subset of states C, the
next state is randomly selected with a uniform probability. This version of the NUTS
algorithm is referred to as naive NUTS, since it requires storing O(2j ) (j is the number
of doubling iterations in the binary tree) candidate states, leading to large memory
requirements. Naive NUTS also requires simulating the full tree—even when the
stopping criteria are satisfied in the middle of the doubling iteration—leading to an
expenditure of computational resources. Hoffman and Gelman [12] introduced an
efficient version of NUTS to alleviate these issues by using a sophisticated transition
kernel for building the binary tree which only requires storing O(j) candidate states
in memory, but generating an extra O(2j ) random numbers (an insignificant cost).
The efficient version of NUTS is used in this paper.

     4.1. L-HNNs in NUTS. Here, we use L-HNNs in place of the leapfrog integra-
tor in the efficient NUTS algorithm to build the binary tree. As a simple demonstra-
tion, consider the 1-D Gaussian mixture density discussed in Section 3.2. Details of
the L-HNN training remain the same. Using L-HNNs in efficient NUTS, 5,000 sam-
ples were simulated, with the first 1,000 samples considered as burn-in and ∆t = 0.05.
Table 1 compares the Effective Sample Size (ESS) of traditional NUTS with that of
L-HNNs in NUTS, where the ESS is normalized by the total number of gradient
evaluations (either from the HMC or the L-HNN training). Also presented are the
normalized ESS values for traditional HMC and L-HNNs in HMC. Overall, the ESS
per gradient of the target density is considerably better for L-HNNs in HMC and
L-HNNs in NUTS compared to traditional HMC and traditional NUTS. Although
the ESS per gradient of the target density is similar between L-HNNs in HMC and
L-HNNs in NUTS, for achieving a similar value of the ESS, while L-HNNs in HMC
required 500, 000 neural network gradients, L-HNNs in NUTS required only around
91, 000. This difference demonstrates the efficacy of NUTS over HMC with L-HNNs
for this simple problem. For more complex high-dimensional problems, the efficacy of
L-HNNs in NUTS is expected to be even since it is difficult to know the optimal end
time for the Hamiltonian trajectory a priori.
     Hoffman and Gelman [12] also proposed a dual averaging scheme to automatically
tune the step size ∆t given a target acceptance ratio. While this automatic step size
determination will be interesting to explore for L-HNNs in NUTS, in this paper, we
fix the step size to the same small value for both L-HNNs in NUTS and traditional
NUTS. This helps facilitate a fair comparison between these algorithms, and step size
tuning will be covered in a future study.
                         BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                   11
Table 1: Comparison of the performance of traditional HMC, traditional NUTS,
HNN-HMC, and HNN-NUTS, considering a 1-D Gaussian mixture density. ESS per
gradient is used as the performance metric.

                                                                 ESS per gradient
                                                                 of target density
                               L-HNNs in HMC                         4.59E − 3
                               Traditional HMC                       8.42E − 5
                               L-HNNs in NUTS                        4.83E − 3
                               Traditional NUTS                       4.4E − 4


     4.2. Online error monitoring. While direct use of L-HNNs in NUTS works for
a simple 1-D Gaussian mixture density, for more complex distributions care must be
taken to avoid large integration errors when building the binary tree. Large integra-
tion errors can arise when sampling in the tails of a distribution, since limited L-HNN
training data may be available in these regions of low probability density. While
building the binary tree, when such a region of low probability density is reached and
integration errors are large, NUTS prematurely terminates the tree building proce-
dure. As a result, the next sample will likely be in the same vicinity as the previous
one. This cycle of generating a new sample near the previous sample continues, lead-
ing to degenerate clusters of samples in regions of low probability density. Figure
4 presents an example of this sampling degeneracy when using L-HNNs in NUTS
for a 3-D Rosenbrock density with heavy tails [20]. Note that the sampler is unable
to rapidly move to regions of high probability density after visiting a region of low
probability density, as a result of large integration errors when building the binary
tree. This sort of degeneracy in sampling may be less concerning when using L-HNNs
in HMC, by virtue of the Metropolis acceptance criterion in Equation (3.5), which
rejects a proposed sample when the difference in the Hamiltonian values is very large.
At the same time, the Metropolis criterion can also prevent L-HNNs in HMC from
efficiently exploring the uncertainty space.

                                                                                     80
     2                                       8
                                                                                     60
     1                                       6
     0                                       4                                       40
                                        q2
q1




                                                                                q3




     1
                                             2                                       20
     2
                                             0
     3                                                                                0
         0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000            0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000             0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
                 Sample index                            Sample index                             Sample index

                  (a)                                      (b)                                     (c)
Fig. 4: Degeneracy in sampling when using L-HNNs in NUTS for a 3-D Rosenbrock
density. These trace plots correspond to the dimensions (a) q1 , (b) q2 , and (c) q3 .
    To alleviate the above-mentioned issues caused by large integration errors, we
propose an online error monitoring scheme for L-HNNs in NUTS. This error monitor-
ing scheme relies on the stopping criterion in Equation 4.2, as introduced by Hoffman
and Gelman [12]. This criterion monitors the integration errors when simulating the
Hamiltonian trajectories and terminates the tree building procedure when they are
large. In theory, if the integration errors are non-existent, then the quantity ε in
12                               S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.


Equation 4.2 will always be less than zero. But for practical applications with non-
negligible integration errors, the error metric (ε ≡ H(qq , p ) + ln u) can be greater than
zero during a doubling iteration. We define a threshold ∆hnn     max for the error metric ε
while using L-HNNs. When this quantity exceeds ∆hnn        max the L-HNN is abandoned
                                                               ,
and standard leapfrog integration using numerical gradients of the target density
takes over. We also introduce a parameter Nlf , which sets the number of leapfrog
samples to take before reintroducing the L-HNN. Nlf can be viewed as the number
of “cooldown” samples needed to return the sampler to regions where the L-HNN is
sufficiently trained. In the traditional version of efficient NUTS, Hoffman and Gelman
[12] recommend that the error threshold for leapfrog integration be set to a large value
(e.g., ∆lf
         max = 1, 000). In setting the threshold for L-HNNs, we recommend a more
conservative value of around ∆hnn max = 10 to prevent sampling degeneracy in regions
of low probability density. Nlf can be set to a low value of 5–20 samples in order to
essentially return the sampler to regions of high probability density. These settings
will contribute to the sampler exploring the uncertainty space well while ensuring
that L-HNNs integration errors in certain regions of the space do not cause sampling
degeneracy.
     Algorithms 4.1 and 4.2 present the pseudocode for using L-HNNs in efficient
NUTS with online error monitoring. These algorithms differ somewhat from the
traditional version of efficient NUTS proposed by Hoffman and Gelman [12]. The
most notable difference is the use of L-HNNs for predicting the Hamiltonian dynamics
in the BuildTree(.) function of Algorithm 4.2. In addition, the BuildTree(.)
function takes and returns an indicator variable 1lf to determine whether L-HNNs
or the leapfrog scheme with numerical gradients of the target density should be used
to simulate the Hamiltonian dynamics. The main loop (Algorithm 4.1) monitors the
number of samples to which the leapfrog scheme with numerical gradients of the target
density is applied, and facilitates reversion to L-HNNs once this number equals Nlf .
There are two error thresholds (i.e., ∆lf            hnn                         lf
                                         max and ∆max ) in the pseudocode. ∆max is the
error threshold for the leapfrog scheme using numerical gradients of the target density.
∆hnn                                                 hnn         lf
  max is the error threshold for L-HNNs with ∆max << ∆max . With respect to the
convergence between L-HNNs in NUTS with online error monitoring and traditional
NUTS, Proposition 4.1 can be shown.
    Proposition 4.1. With ∆hnn
                             max → −∞ and Nlf = C, where C is an integer
greater than 0, L-HNNs in NUTS with online error monitoring converges to traditional
NUTS.
    Proof. It is straightforward to show this by virtue of lines 8–13 in Algorithm 4.1
and lines 7–10 in Algorithm 4.2. As ∆hnnmax → −∞, 1lf = 1 and Algorithms 4.1 and
4.2 simply never call L-HNNs for predicting the Hamiltonian dynamics, but instead
always rely on the leapfrog integration with numerical gradients, thus converging to
traditional NUTS.
     5. Sampling from a 3-D Rosenbrock density. A 3-D Rosenbrock density
[20] is considered to demonstrate the performance differences between HNNs and L-
HNNs, and to investigate the performance of L-HNNs considering different amounts
of training data. A 3-D Rosenbrock density makes for a particularly interesting case
study, due to its heavy tails. The density function is defined by [20]:

                                  N −1
                                   X                                      
                                           100(qi+1 − qi2 )2 + (1 − qi )2 /20
                                          
(5.1)            f (qq ) ∝ exp −
                                   i=1
                            BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                                       13

Algorithm 4.1 L-HNNs in efficient NUTS with online error monitoring (main loop)
 1: Hamiltonian:     H = U (qq ) + K(pp), Samples: M; Starting sample: {qq 0 , p 0 }; Step
    size: ∆t; Threshold for leapfrog: ∆lf                                hnn
                                           max ; Threshold for L-HNNs: ∆max ; Number
    of leapfrog samples: Nlf
 2: Initialize 1lf = 0, nlf = 0
 3: for i = 1 : M do
 4:    p (0) ∼ N (00, I d )
 5:    q (0) = q i−1 h
                                                  i
 6:    u ∼ U nif orm 0, exp {−H q (0), p (0) }
 7:   Initialize q − = q (0), q + = q (0), p − = p (0), p + = p (0), j = 0, q ∗ = q i−1 , n =
      1, s = 1
 8:   if 1lf = 1 then
 9:      nlf ← nlf + 1
10:   end if
11:   if nlf = Nlf then
12:      1lf = 0, nlf = 0
13:   end if
14:   while s = 1 do
15:      Choose direction νj ∼ U nif orm({−1, 1})
16:      if j = −1 then
17:         q − , p − , , , q 0 , p 0 , n0 , s0 , 1lf = BuildTree(qq − , p − , u, νj , j, ∆t, 1lf )
18:      else
19:          , , q + , p + , q 0 , p 0 , n0 , s0 , 1lf = BuildTree(qq + , p + , u, νj , j, ∆t, 1lf )
20:      end if
21:      if s0 = 1 then
                                                        0
22:         With probability min{1, nn }, set {qq i , p i } ← {qq 0 , p 0 }
23:      end if
24:      n ← n + n0
         s ← s0 1 (qq + − q − ) · p − ≥ 0 1 (qq + − q − ) · p + ≥ 0
                                                                           
25:
26:      j ←j+1
27:   end while
28: end for



    We trained HNNs and L-HNNs with the same training data, which contained 40
samples from HMC, each with an end time of T = 40 using a ∆t = 0.025. Both
the HNNs and L-HNNs had three hidden layers with 100 neurons each. A total of
100, 000 steps at a learning rate of 5E − 4 was used for training the HNNs and L-
HNNs. A sine activation function was used, per the recommendations of Mattheakis
et al. [17]. Efficient NUTS with online error monitoring (i.e., Algorithms 4.1 and
4.2) was employed to simulate 35,000 samples from the target density. HNNs and
L-HNNs were independently used to simulate the Hamiltonian dynamics within the
BuildTree(.) function. ∆hnn   max was set to 10—and when exceeded, the leapfrog
scheme with numerical gradients of the target density was set to take over—and Nlf
was set to 20.
    Figures 5a and 5b present trace plots for the dimension q1 , obtained using HNNs
and L-HNNs, respectively. Note that, whether using HNNs or L-HNNs, efficient NUTS
with online error monitoring mitigates degeneracy in sampling, compared to Figure 4a.
Perhaps more important are the integration errors when predicting the Hamiltonian
14                                      S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.


Algorithm 4.2 L-HNNs in efficient NUTS with online error monitoring (build tree
function)
 1: function BuildTree(q    q , p , u, ν, j, ∆t, 1lf )
 2: if j = 0 then
 3:    Base case taking one leapfrog step
 4:    q 0 , p 0 ← Algorithm 3.2 with initial conditions:             z (0) = {qq , p }, Steps: 1; End
      Time: ∆t
      1lf ← 1lf or 1 H q 0 , p 0 + ln u > ∆hnn
                                                                  
 5:                                                             max
 6:   s0 ← 1 H q 0 , p 0 + ln u ≤ ∆hnn              max
 7:   if 1lf = 1 then
 8:      q 0 , p 0 ← Leapfrog integration with initial conditions: z (0) = {qq , p }, Steps: 1;
         End Time:      ∆t 
         s0 ← 1 H q 0 , p 0 + ln u ≤ ∆lf
                                                             
 9:                                                     max
10:   end if 
      n0 ← 1 u ≤ exp {−H q 0 , p 0 }
                                                   
11:
12:   return q 0 , p 0 , q 0 , p 0 , q 0 , p 0 , n0 , s0 , 1lf
13: else
14:   Recursion to build left and right sub-trees (follows from Algorithm 3 in [12],
      with 1lf additionally passed to and retrieved from every BuildTree evaluation)

15:   return q − , p − , q + , p + , q 0 , p 0 , n0 , s0 , 1lf
16: end if




dynamics. Figures 6a and 6b present these errors—defined as [ε ≡ H(qq 0 , p 0 ) + ln u] in
Algorithm 4.2—as obtained using HNNs and L-HNNs, respectively. The errors when
using HNNs are substantially larger across the sample indices, compared to using
L-HNNs. Large integration errors lead to an increase in the number of samples for
which the leapfrog scheme with numerical gradients of the target density is called.
While using HNNs, the number of samples for which traditional leapfrog is used is
4,706; using L-HNNs, this number reduces to only 180. In total, HNNs and L-HNNs,
require an additional 1,437,900 and 63,598 numerical gradients of the target density,
respectively (above what is required to generate the training data)—a substantial
difference.
     To investigate the influence of training data set size, we consider three training
datasets for L-HNNs. All three sets include Mt = 40 samples from the 3-D Rosenbrock
density simulated using traditional HMC, but with different end times — T = 100,
150, and 250 units — and ∆t = 0.025. We simulated 125, 000 samples from the
3-D Rosenbrock density, with the first 5, 000 samples considered as burn-in. For effi-
cient NUTS with online error monitoring, we set ∆hnn max = 10 and Nlf = 20. Figure 7
presents empirical cumulative distribution function (eCDF) plots for the three dimen-
sions. In this figure, LHNN-NUTS 1, LHNN-NUTS 2, and LHNN-NUTS 3 correspond
to end times of T = 100, 150, and 250 units, respectively. Note that irrespective of
the amount of training data, in general, the eCDFs of LHNN-NUTS with online error
monitoring closely match the eCDFs simulated using traditional NUTS with numer-
ical gradients of the target density. Moreover, LHNN-NUTS 2 and LHNN-NUTS 3,
which were trained on HMC samples with longer Hamiltonian trajectories, almost
exactly match the reference eCDFs, as compared to LHNN-NUTS 1, which shows
slight deviations in dimensions q2 (Figure 7b) and q3 (Figure 7c).
                                                     BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                                                                                          15

                        3                                                                             3
                        2                                                                             2
                        1                                                                             1
                        0                                                                             0
                q1




                                                                                              q1
                        1                                                                             1
                        2                                                                             2
                        3                                                                             3
                             0          10000 20000 30000                                                  0             10000 20000 30000
                                           Sample index                                                                     Sample index
                                           (a)                                                                                          (b)
 Fig. 5: Trace plots of dimension q1 for a 3-D Rosenbrock density simulated via efficient
 NUTS with online error monitoring using (a) HNNs and (b) L-HNNs. Note that the
 sort of degeneracy presented in Figure 4 is absent due to the online error monitoring
 scheme.

                        20                                                                            20
                        15                                                                            15
                        10                                                                            10
                         5                                                                             5
               Error




                                                                                              Error




                         0                                                                             0
                         5                                                                             5
                        10                                                                            10
                              0         10000 20000 30000                                                  0               10000 20000 30000
                                           Sample index                                                                       Sample index
                    (a)                                   (b)
 Fig. 6: L-HNNs error metric, as defined by the quantity [ε ≡ H q 0 , p 0 + ln u] in
                                                                         

 Algorithm 4.2, while generating samples from a 3-D Rosenbrock density using (a)
 HNNs and (b) L-HNNs in efficient NUTS with online error monitoring. These error
 values are considerably lower when using L-HNNs than HNNs.
              1.0           NUTS                                        1.0                                                       1.0
                            LHNN-NUTS 1
              0.8           LHNN-NUTS 2                                 0.8                                                       0.8
                            LHNN-NUTS 3
Probability




              0.6
                                                          Probability




                                                                        0.6
                                                                                                                    Probability




                                                                                                                                  0.6

              0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4

              0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2

              0.0                                                       0.0                                                       0.0
                    3    2        1   0    1     2    3                       0   2     4       6      8       10                       0     20   40        60   80   100
                                      q1                                                 q2                                                             q3

                                  (a)                                                 (b)                                                          (c)
 Fig. 7: Empirical CDF plots of samples from a 3-D Rosenbrock density simulated via
 NUTS and L-HNNs in NUTS with online error monitoring, using different training
 datasets. eCDF plots are presented for the dimensions (a) q1 , (b) q2 , and (c) q3 .
 Details of the L-HNN training data are given in Table 2.
16                               S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.


      Table 2 compares the performance of the traditional NUTS with the LHNN-NUTS
with online error monitoring in terms of ESS, number of gradients of the target density,
and average ESS across all the dimensions per gradient of the target density. In short,
all LHNN-NUTS results show significant improvement over the traditional NUTS
method in terms of required gradient evaluations, while accurately matching the target
eCDFs (Figure 7) and producing samples with comparable ESS values. Even for
short training trajectories with T = 100, the total number of gradient evaluations is
reduced by 83% and the average ESS per gradient evaluation increases by 5 times.
For longer training trajectories, the number of gradient evaluations reduces from
approximately 16 million to only approximately 600,000 while the ESS per gradient
evaluation improves by more than an order of magnitude relative to traditional NUTS.
It is worth noting, however, that there is no noticeable improvement in performance
by increasing T from 150 to 250 for the training data generation, which implies that
there is a critical length T for the training data.
Table 2: Performance comparison between traditional NUTS and HNN-NUTS with
different training data characteristics, considering a 3-D degenerate Rosenbrock den-
sity.

                                                                        Avg. ESS per
                                                  # gradients of
                                 ESS                                      gradient of
                                                  target density
                                                                        target density
           NUTS           (1396.59, 2338.99,
                                                    15, 899, 976           0.000128
            [12]              2411.40)
                                                    2, 711, 240
      Mt = 40; T = 100    (1339.13, 1665.76,
                                                 Training: 160,000         0.000572
      [LHNN-NUTS 1]           1648.85)
                                               Evaluation: 2,551,240
                                                      607, 298
      Mt = 40; T = 150    (1217.63, 1710.97,
                                                 Training: 240,000          0.00251
      [LHNN-NUTS 2]           1654.11)
                                                Evaluation: 367,298
                                                      642, 414
      Mt = 40; T = 250    (1445.03, 1729.98,
                                                 Training: 400,000          0.00236
      [LHNN-NUTS 3]           1387.91)
                                                Evaluation: 242,414
     - Notations. Mt : Number of training samples; T : End time for trajectory
     - Avg. ESS represents the ESS values averaged across the three dimensions.
     - Evaluation in the table implies the use of L-HNNs in NUTS with online error monitoring

    For a small value of Mt , as expected, L-HNNs in NUTS would require more
numerical gradients of the target density during evaluation because the training data
does not adequately capture the randomization of the momenta. But for a large
value of Mt , although the additional numerical gradients of the target density may
become small, the upfront cost for generating the training data may be high. We
found from the 3-D Rosenbrock example that fixing Mt = 40 provides a balance
between the upfront costs for generating the training data and additional numerical
gradients required during the evaluation. Therefore, we use Mt = 40 for the case
study examples to be discussed in Section 6.
     6. Results. We considered five case studies to demonstrate the LHNN-NUTS
with online error monitoring and compared its performance to the traditional NUTS.
Table 3 summarizes the main performance metrics for the five case studies. In the
following sections, the case studies are defined along with the training details for L-
HNNs, results from Table 3 are discussed, and plots of the samples from the target
densities are presented.
                         BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                    17
Table 3: Summary of the performance of LHNN-NUTS with online error monitoring
across the different case studies considered.

                                                 # gradients          Avg. ESS per
                             ESS                   of target            gradient of
                                                    density           target density
                               3-D degenerate Rosenbrock
                                                    642, 414
                       (1445.03, 1729.98,
    LHNN-NUTS                                 Training: 400, 000          0.00236
                            1387.91)
                                             Evaluation: 242, 414
                       (1396.59, 2338.99,
        NUTS                                      15, 899, 976            0.000128
                            2411.40)
                              5-D ill-conditioned Gaussian
                       (20000, 17741.21,            408, 800
    LHNN-NUTS          13906.42, 8382.5,      Training: 400, 000           0.0307
                            2763.38)          Evaluation: 8, 800
                       (20000, 17877.90,
        NUTS           14645.54, 7931.68,         11, 817, 469            0.00106
                            2657.19)
                              10-D degenerate Rosenbrock
                     (15535.69, 28217.40,
                      28965.00, 27280.67,           418, 936
    LHNN-NUTS         21268.00, 13532.28,     Training: 400, 000           0.0368
                       8418.80, 5731.09,      Evaluation: 18, 936
                       3299.92, 2045.02)
                      (15771.46, 27125.5,
                       27825.9, 25107.02,
        NUTS           21963.9, 13553.21,          7, 015, 025            0.00219
                       8548.44, 5631.39,
                       2921.78, 1698.69)
                           24-D Bayesian logistic regression
                                                    400, 000
    LHNN-NUTS               97254.18          Training: 400, 000           0.243
                                                 Evaluation: –
        NUTS                97702.96               1, 256, 229             0.0777
                                     100-D rough well
                                                    422, 272
     HNN-NUTS                2744.97          Training: 400, 000           0.0065
                                              Evaluation: 22, 272
        NUTS                 4775.33               1, 279, 873            0.00373
                                     2-D Neal’s funnel
                                                   3, 596, 688
    LHNN-NUTS          (1019.87, 666.73)      Training: 400, 000          0.000234
                                            Evaluation: 3, 196, 688
        NUTS           (1012.45, 718.07)          16, 639, 072            0.000052
   - For dimension greater than 10, only the average ESS across all dimensions is reported.
   - Evaluation in the table implies the use of L-HNNs in NUTS with online error monitoring.


    6.1. Case studies. We considered the following five case studies. Corresponding
results are presented herein. For all cases, except where otherwise noted, the L-HNNs
were trained using Mt = 40 HMC samples each, with an end time of T = 250 units
and a step size of ∆t = 0.025. The architecture of the L-HNNs was composed of
three hidden layers, each with 100 neurons, and a sine activation function [17]. For
18                            S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.


training, a total of 100,000 steps were used at a learning rate of 5E − 4 and ∆hnn
                                                                               max and
Nlf in LHNN-NUTS with online error monitoring were set to 10 and 20, respectively.

    6.1.1. 5-D ill-conditioned Gaussian. A 5-D ill-conditioned Gaussian distri-
bution from Levy et al. [14] with a zero mean vector and a diagonal covariance matrix
was considered. The diagonal elements of the covariance matrix scale in log-linear
fashion, as presented below:

(6.1)                         Σ) = [0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10.0, 100.0]
                         diag(Σ

     In this example, the L-HNNs had 10 inputs (five position variables and five mo-
menta) and predicted five latent variables, whose sum was treated as the Hamiltonian,
as discussed in Section 3.1. A total of 25, 000 samples were simulated from the target
density, with the first 5, 000 samples treated as burn-in.
     From Table 3, we see that using LHNN-NUTS reduces the number of gradient
evaluations by a factor of nearly 30, while improving the ESS per gradient evalua-
tion by more than an order of magnitude. Moreover, as we can see from Figure 8,
which shows scatter plots of the samples from the 5-D ill-conditioned Gaussian using
LHNN-NUTS and traditional NUTS, the LHNN-NUTS with online error monitoring
satisfactorily samples from the target density. This is further verified by the ESS
values in Table 3, which are consistent between the two methods.




Fig. 8: Scatter plot comparison between NUTS and LHNN-NUTS with online error
monitoring for a 5-D ill-conditioned Gaussian distribution. (Blue dots: traditional
NUTS; Red dots: LHNN-NUTS with online error monitoring)
                        BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                             19

    6.1.2. 10-D degenerate Rosenbrock density. Here, A 10-D version of the
Rosenbrock density in Equation (5.1) was considered. The L-HNNs had 20 inputs (10
position variables and 10 momenta) and predicted 10 latent variables, whose sum was
treated as the Hamiltonian. Approximately 125, 000 samples were simulated from the
target density, with the first 5, 000 samples treated as burn-in.
    From Table 3, we again see drastic reduction in the number of gradient evaluations
(approximately a factor of 17) and more than an order of magnitude reduction in ESS
per gradient evaluation. Figure 9 presents scatter plots of the samples generated
with LHNN-NUTS and the traditional NUTS. Although for dimensions q9 and q10 ,
traditional NUTS included a few more samples in the tails than LHNN-NUTS, the
scatter plots overall match satisfactorily. Moreover, the eCDF plots for dimensions q9
and q10 from LHNN-NUTS closely matched the reference eCDFs.




Fig. 9: Scatter plot comparison between NUTS and LHNN-NUTS with online er-
ror monitoring, considering a 10-D degenerate Rosenbrock distribution. (Blue dots:
traditional NUTS; Red dots: LHNN-NUTS with online error monitoring)
    6.1.3. 24-D Bayesian logistic regression. Next, a 24-D Bayesian logistic re-
gression on the German credit dataset [8] was performed. The likelihood function is
given by:
                       L(qq |yi , z i ) ∝ 1/ 1 + exp (−yiq >z i )
                                                                 
(6.2)
where z i are the predictors, yi is the response for the data point i and q are the
parameters to be inferred. All the predictor variables were normalized to have zero
20                                  S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.


mean and unit variance. The prior distribution of the parameters was assumed to
follow a multivariate Gaussian distribution with identity covariance:
(6.3)                                       g(qq ) = N (00, I )
Given the likelihood and prior, the negative log posterior (i.e., the potential energy
function) is given by:
                                                  K         
                                                  X                                 
(6.4) U (qq ) = − ln f (qq |{zz i , yi }K
                                        i=1 ) =           ln 1/ 1 + exp (−yiq >z i ) + ||qq ||2 /(2K)
                                                  i=1

where K is the number of data points.
    The L-HNNs had 48 inputs (24 positions and 24 momenta) and predicted 24 latent
variables, whose sum was treated as the Hamiltonian. A total of 125, 000 samples were
simulated from the target density, with the first 5, 000 samples treated as burn-in.
    In this case, Table 3 shows that no additional gradient evaluations were necessary
due to the error monitoring step; hence all gradient evaluations occurred during train-
ing. Again, a huge savings was achieved in the total number of gradient evaluations
and the ESS per gradient evaluation although the traditional NUTS required far fewer
evaluations than in the previous examples.
    Owing to the high dimensionality, the posterior mean and standard deviations of
the 24 parameters are presented in Figures 10a and 10b, respectively. The statistics
predicted by LHNN-NUTS satisfactorily match the reference values obtained using
traditional NUTS.

                                 NUTS
       0.10                      LHNN-NUTS                                  0.08
                                                       Standard deviation




       0.05                                                                 0.07
Mean




       0.00
                                                                            0.06
       0.05
                                                                            0.05
       0.10
              0   5      10    15     20          25                               0   5      10    15     20   25
                      Parameter index                                                      Parameter index
                        (a)                                                                  (b)
Fig. 10: (a) Means and (b) standard deviations of the inferred parameters for the
24-D Bayesian logistic regression problem.

     6.1.4. 100-D rough well. A 100-D rough well distribution from Levy et al.
[14] and Gu and Sun [11] was considered:
                                  n 1         X     q i o
(6.5)                f (qq ) ∝ exp − q >q − η   cos
                                     2        i
                                                    η

with η = 0.01. Levy et al. [14] point out that for a small η, although the cosine term
alters the potential energy negligibly, it perturbs the gradient by a high frequency
noise oscillation between -1 and 1.
                        BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                              21

     The architecture of the L-HNNs was composed of three hidden layers, each with
500 neurons. For training, a total of 100,000 steps at a learning rate of 1E − 4 were
used. ∆hnnmax and Nlf in LHNN-NUTS with online error monitoring were set to 20
and 5, respectively. All other architecture details follow those above. The L-HNNs
had 200 inputs (100 positions and 100 momenta) and predicted 100 latent variables,
whose sum was treated as the Hamiltonian. A total of 10, 000 samples were simulated
from the target density, with the first 2, 000 samples treated as burn-in.
     For this very high-dimensional example, Table 3 shows that we still achieve a very
large reduction in the number of gradient evaluations, although the ESS is smaller
which reduces the improvement in ESS per gradient evaluation to only a factor of
∼ 2. Nonetheless, the method outperforms the traditional NUTS and produces sat-
isfactory samples as shown in Figure 11, which presents scatter plots for 10 of the
100 dimensions. Whereas L-HNNs in NUTS with online error monitoring takes only
several hours to simulate these 10, 000 samples, traditional NUTS takes several days.




Fig. 11: Scatter plot comparison between NUTS and LHNN-NUTS with online error
monitoring for the 100-D rough well distribution showing 10 of the 100 dimensions.
(Blue dots: traditional NUTS; Red dots: LHNN-NUTS with online error monitoring)
22                                  S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.


    6.1.5. 2-D Neal’s funnel density. As a final example, the following 2-D Neal’s
funnel density was considered:
                                     (
                                      q1 = N (0, 3)
(6.6)                      f (qq ) ∝
                                      q2 = N (0, expq1 )

This density can be complex to sample from, due its extreme curvature. The L-HNNs
had four inputs (two positions and two momenta) and predicted two latent variables,
whose sum was treated as the Hamiltonian. A total of 25, 000 samples were simulated
from the target density, with the first 5, 000 samples treated as burn-in.
    In this case, the online error monitoring scheme was used extensively as seen in Ta-
ble 3 due to the difficulty in training L-HNNs for this complex problem. Nonetheless,
we see a reduction of more than 13 million gradient evaluations (traditional NUTS
requires a huge number of gradient evaluations) and nearly an order of magitude im-
provement in the ESS per gradient evaluation. Figure 12a presents a scatter plot of
the samples generated using LHNN-NUTS and traditional NUTS. Figures 12b and
12c compare the eCDF plots for the two dimensions. Note that the plots generated
using LHNN-NUTS compare well with those obtained using traditional NUTS.

                                          1.0       NUTS                                 1.0
                                                    LHNN-NUTS
                                          0.8                                            0.8
                            Probability




                                          0.6
                                                                           Probability




                                                                                         0.6

                                          0.4                                            0.4

                                          0.2                                            0.2

                                          0.0                                            0.0
                                                5     0      5   10   15                    600 400 200 0    200 400 600
                                                            q1                                          q2

            (a)                                           (b)                                        (c)
Fig. 12: (a) Scatter plot comparison of samples generated from a 2-D Neal’s funnel
density, using NUTS and L-HNNs in NUTS with online error monitoring. Comparison
of the eCDF plots for the dimensions (b) q1 and (c) q2 .

     6.2. Summary of the performance metrics. Overall, as shown in Table 3,
LHNN-NUTS requires significantly fewer gradients of the target density and produces
ESSs per gradient that are about an order of magnitude better than those generated
using traditional NUTS. This, of course, varies over the examples considered and is
strongly dependent on a few factors: 1. the number of additional gradients needed
from the online monitoring scheme; 2. the general efficiency of the NUTS algorithm
for the specific problem; and 3. the size of the training set (which was held constant
across all problems). For most of the cases, the additional gradients of the target
density required during the online error monitoring scheme are small compared to the
gradient evaluations needed to generate the training data where the number of addi-
tional gradients during online error monitoring seems to depend on the complexity of
the target density. In particular, the 3-D Rosenbrock density, which has heavy tails,
required a large number of additional gradients and the 2-D Neal’s funnel density,
which has a high local curvature, required the highest number of additional gradi-
ents. Note that, in both of these cases, the traditional NUTS algorithm required a
huge number of gradient evaluations (∼ 16 Million). On the other hand, the 24D
                        BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                               23

logistic regression problem required no additional gradient evaluations during the on-
line error monitoring, while traditional NUTS is relatively efficient compared to the
other problems (requiring only 1.25 Million evaluations). We therefore generalize and
loosely state that, for problems where the NUTS algorithm requires a large number
of gradient evaluations, we expect that the LHNN-NUTS will require a large num-
ber of additional evaluations due to error monitoring with some exceptions (e.g. 5D
ill-conditioned Gaussian). Nonetheless, in all cases the LHNN-NUTS with online er-
ror monitoring offers considerable computational gains while producing samples that
satisfactorily match the reference target density.


     7. Discussion of future work. In HMC and NUTS, there are opportunities
to explore more recent neural network architectures that learn Hamiltonian systems,
with the potential for improved performance over HNNs and L-HNNs. This line
of investigation is motivated by a 100-D Gaussian with Wishart inverse covariance
from Hoffman and Gelman [12]. For this problem, the ESS per gradient values were
similar between LHNN-NUTS and traditional NUTS. The poorer performance of L-
HNNs in this case is a result of many strong correlations in the target distribution
and large integration errors while simulating the Hamiltonian trajectories. Despite
the large integration errors for L-HNNs, the online error monitoring scheme ensures
that the correct distribution is inferred and the correlations between the variables are
adequately captured (as seen from Figure 13) at the expense of calling the leapfrog
scheme with gradients of the target density many times during the sampling. However,
similar to the 100-D rough well example from Section 6.1.4, while L-HNNs in NUTS
with online error monitoring takes in the order of hours to simulate 10, 000 samples,
traditional NUTS takes in the order of days due to the complexity of this problem
(provided that the Hamiltonian gradients are computed numerically and not using a
closed-form solution).
     Mattheakis et al. [17] propose neural networks that use time as inputs and pre-
dict the {qq , p } coordinates. Their loss function minimizes the mean squared error
between the time derivatives of the actual {qq , p } coordinates and those predicted by
the neural networks using the right-hand side of Equation (2.2). This form for the loss
function seems to result in more rapid and substantial loss reduction. Jin et al. [13]
propose symplectic networks, which lead to better conservation of the Hamiltonian
than HNNs. Future work will investigate whether architectures such as these would
lead to an improvement in ESS per gradient, while satisfactorily sampling from the
target density.
     While this paper uses an Eucledian formulation for generating momenta that
are independent of the current position [Equation (2.6)], training L-HNNs under a
Riemannian formulation for the momenta [9] is also possible. For some densities
with high local curvatures (e.g., the Neal’s funnel or the multivariate Gaussian with
Wishart inverse covariance), L-HNNs trained in a Riemannian space may generate
more computational gains in terms of ESS per gradient. Finally, although the error
monitoring scheme introduced in this paper calls the standard leapfrog with gradients
of the target density when the L-HNN integration errors are large, it does not retrain
the L-HNNs. Such retraining, when performed on-the-fly within the error-monitoring
scheme, is similar in concept to active or online learning. Owing to the computa-
tional expense involved in training neural networks for high-dimensional problems,
quantifying the optimal schedule for retraining that is agnostic to the complexity and
properties of the target density will be an interesting avenue of exploration.
24                           S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.




Fig. 13: Scatter plot comparison between NUTS and LHNN-NUTS with online error
monitoring, considering a 100-D Gaussian distribution with Wishart inverse covari-
ance. As an illustration, 10 of the 100 dimensions are shown. Whereas L-HNNs in
NUTS with online error monitoring takes in the order of hours to simulate 10, 000
samples, traditional NUTS takes in the order of days; provided that the Hamiltonian
gradients are computed numerically and not using a closed-form solution. (Blue dots:
traditional NUTS; Red dots: LHNN-NUTS with online error monitoring)


    8. Summary and conclusions. Neural networks that learn Hamiltonian sys-
tems (e.g., HNNs) have received a great deal of interest. We proposed using HNNs
to solve Bayesian inference problems through the HMC framework. HNNs have im-
portant properties (e.g., time reversibility and Hamiltonian conservation) that make
them amenable for usage in HMC sampling. Moreover, once trained, HNNs do not
require numerical gradients of the target density—which can be computationally ex-
pensive—during sampling. To increase the expressivity of HNNs, we proposed HNNs
with latent outputs (L-HNNs) and demonstrated that L-HNNs enable integration er-
ror reductions in predicting the Hamiltonian dynamics when compared to HNNs for
a 3-D Rosenbrock density function. Although HMC is a state-of-the-art sampler for
Bayesian inference, it requires the specification of an end time of the trajectory for
each sample, and this can considerably influence the inference quality. NUTS auto-
matically decides this end time, while also ensuring stationarity and that the next
proposed sample is farther away from the previous one (i.e., lesser correlations be-
tween samples). We further proposed to use L-HNNs in NUTS with an online error
monitoring scheme that reverts to the standard leapfrog integration for a few samples
whenever the L-HNNs integration errors are high. L-HNNs integration errors can be
high in regions of the uncertainty space that feature fewer training data (e.g., the
                          BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                                      25

tails). This proposed online error monitoring scheme ensures that L-HNNs rapidly
move to regions of high probability density after visiting a region of low probability
density, and it prevents degeneracy of the sampling scheme.
     L-HNNs in NUTS with online error monitoring was demonstrated for several
example cases involving complex, heavy-tailed, and high-local-curvature probability
densities with dimensions ranging from 5 to 100. The performance of L-HNNs in
NUTS was compared to that of traditional NUTS, which relies on numerical gradi-
ents of the target density. L-HNNs in NUTS satisfactorily inferred the distributions
of these example cases, as evidenced by scatter plots and eCDFs, when compared to
traditional NUTS. More interestingly, L-HNNs in NUTS required 1–2 orders of mag-
nitude fewer evaluations of the target density gradients, and produced an ESS per
gradient that was an order of magnitude better than that generated via traditional
NUTS.
     Several future opportunities exist for improving the performance of neural net-
works that identify Hamiltonian systems for Bayesian inference problems: (1) newer
architectures (e.g., symplectic networks) better conserve the Hamiltonian than L-
HNNs, and result in an efficient inference, as quantified by the ESS per gradient;
(2) training and evaluating L-HNNs in a Riemannian space rather than an Eucle-
dian space may lead to significant computational efficiencies for densities with high
local curvatures; and (3) active learning for training L-HNNs; in particular, optimal
schedules for retraining L-HNNs in light of the high neural network training costs for
high-dimensional problems could improve efficiency.

    Software. The codes used for simulating the results in this paper are available
at https://github.com/IdahoLabResearch/BIhNNs.

    Acknowledgments. We thank Denny Thaler from RWTH Aachen University
for his comments on our code. This research is supported through INL’s Laboratory
Directed Research and Development (LDRD) Program under U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE) Idaho Operations Office contract no. DE-AC07-05ID14517. This
research made use of the resources of the High Performance Computing Center at
INL, which is supported by the DOE Office of Nuclear Energy and the Nuclear Science
User Facilities under contract no. DE-AC07-05ID14517.

                                        REFERENCES

 [1] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro, G. S. Corrado,
         A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, I. Goodfellow, A. Harp, G. Irving,
         M. Isard, Y. Jia, R. Jozefowicz, L. Kaiser, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, D. Mané,
         R. Monga, S. Moore, D. Murray, C. Olah, M. Schuster, J. Shlens, B. Steiner,
         I. Sutskever, K. Talwar, P. Tucker, V. Vanhoucke, V. Vasudevan, F. Viégas,
         O. Vinyals, P. Warden, M. Wattenberg, M. Wicke, Y. Yu, and X. Zheng, Ten-
         sorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems, 2015, https://www.
         tensorflow.org/. Software available from tensorflow.org.
 [2] Autograd Development Team, Autograd package, 2015, https://github.com/HIPS/autograd
         (accessed 2022/04/24). Version 1.0.
 [3] M. Betancourt, A conceptual introduction to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, Jan. 2017, https:
         //arxiv.org/abs/1701.02434.
 [4] S. Blanes, F. Casas, and J. M. Sanz-Serna, Numerical integrators for the Hybrid Monte
         Carlo method, SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 36 (2014), pp. A1556–A1580, https:
         //doi.org/10.1137/130932740.
 [5] M. P. Calvo and J. M. Sanz-Serna, High-order symplectic Runge–Kutta–Nyström methods,
         SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 14 (1993), pp. 1237–1252, https://doi.org/10.1137/
         0914073.
26                                S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.


 [6] Y. Che, X. Wu, G. Pastore, W. Li, and K. Shirvan, Application of Kriging and Variational
         Bayesian Monte Carlo method for improved prediction of doped UO2 fission gas release,
         Annals of Nuclear Energy, 153 (2021), p. 108046, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2020.
         108046.
 [7] S. L. N. Dhulipala, M. D. Shields, B. W. Spencer, C. Bolisetti, A. E. Slaughter,
         V. M. Laboure, and P. Chakroborty, Active learning with multifidelity modeling for
         efficient rare event simulation, Journal of Computational Physics, 468 (2022), p. 111506,
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2022.111506.
 [8] D. Dua and C. Graff, UCI Machine Learning Repository, 2017, http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml.
 [9] M. Girolami and B. Calderhead, Riemann manifold Langevin and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
         methods, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 73
         (2011), pp. 123–214, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9868.2010.00765.x.
[10] S. Greydanus, M. Dzamba, and J. Yosinski, Hamiltonian neural networks, Sept. 2019, https:
         //arxiv.org/abs/1906.01563.
[11] M. Gu and S. Sun, Neural Langevin dynamical sampling, IEEE Access, 8 (2020), pp. 31595–
         31605, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2972611.
[12] M. D. Hoffman and A. Gelman, The No-U-Turn sampler: adaptively setting path lengths in
         Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15 (2014), pp. 1593–
         1623, https://doi.org/10.5555/2627435.2638586.
[13] P. Jin, Z. Zhang, A. Zhu, Y. Tang, and G. E. Karniadakis, SympNets: Intrinsic structure-
         preserving symplectic networks for identifying Hamiltonian systems, Neural Networks, 132
         (2020), pp. 166–179, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2020.08.017.
[14] D. Levy, M. D. Hoffman, and J. Sohl-Dickstein, Generalizing Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
         with neural networks, Mar. 2017, https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.09268.
[15] L. Li, A. Holbrook, B. Shahbaba, and P. Baldi, Neural network gradient Hamiltonian
         Monte Carlo, Computational statistics, 34 (2019), pp. 281–299, https://doi.org/10.1007/
         s00180-018-00861-z.
[16] P. Mann, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics, Oxford University Press, United Kingdom,
         1st ed., 2018.
[17] M. Mattheakis, D. Sondak, A. S. Dogra, and P. Protopapas, Hamiltonian neural networks
         for solving equations of motion, Physical Review E, 105 (2022), p. 065305, https://doi.org/
         10.1103/PhysRevE.105.065305.
[18] R. M. Neal, MCMC using Hamiltonian dynamics, June 2012, https://arxiv.org/abs/1206.
         1901.
[19] M. Nishio and A. Arakawa, Performance of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo and No-U-Turn Sam-
         pler for estimating genetic parameters and breeding values, Genetics Selection Evolution,
         51 (2019), pp. 1–12, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12711-019-0515-1.
[20] F. Pagani, M. Wiegand, and S. Nadarajah, An n-dimensional Rosenbrock distribution for
         MCMC testing, May 2019, https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.09556.
[21] G. O. Roberts and J. S. Rosenthal, General state space Markov chains and
         MCMC algorithms, Probability surveys, 1 (2004), pp. 20–71, https://doi.org/10.1214/
         154957804100000024.
[22] Y. Tong, S. Xiong, X. He, G. Pan, and B. Zhu, Symplectic neural networks in Taylor series
         form for Hamiltonian systems, Journal of Computational Physics, 437 (2021), p. 110325,
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2021.110325.
[23] A. Vehtari, A. Gelman, D. Simpson, B. Carpenter, and P.-C. Bürkner, Rank-
         normalization, folding, and localization: An improved R-hat for assessing convergence of
         MCMC, Bayesian analysis, 16 (2021), pp. 667–718, https://doi.org/10.1214/20-BA1221.
[24] N. K. Vishnoi, An introduction to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo method for sampling, Aug. 2021,
         https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.12107.
[25] Y. D. Zhong, B. Dey, and A. Chakraborty, Symplectic ode-net: Learning Hamiltonian
         dynamics with control, Apr. 2019, https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.12077.
                          BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                                    27

    SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL.
    Synchronized leap frog integration. Algorithm 8.1 presents the synchronized
leap frog integration scheme.

Algorithm 8.1 Synchronized Leap Frog integration for simulating Hamiltonian dy-
namics
 1: Hamiltonian: H, Initial conditions: z (0) = {q         q (0), p (0)}, Dimensions: d, Steps:
    N , End time: T
 2: Numerical gradients of H with respect to q (t) using packages like autograd [2]
           T
 3: ∆t = N
 4: for j = 0 : N − 1 do
 5:   t = j ∆t
 6:   Compute ∂q∂H q (t)
 7:   for i = 1 : d do
                                ∆t             ∆t2    ∂H
 8:      qi (t + ∆t) = qi (t) + m i
                                    pi (t) − 2m  i ∂qi (t)
 9:   end for
                      ∂H
10:   Compute ∂qq (t+∆t)
11:   for i = 1 : d do                                      
12:      pi (t + ∆t) = pi (t) − ∆t
                                 2
                                        ∂H
                                       ∂qi (t) +     ∂H
                                                 ∂qi (t+∆t)
13:   end for
14: end for



    Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. Algorithm 8.2 presents the HMC algorithm.

Algorithm 8.2 Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
 1: Hamiltonian:    H = U (qq ) + K(pp), Samples: M, Starting sample: {qq 0 , p 0 }, End
    time for trajectory: T
 2: for i = 1 : M do
 3:   p (0) ∼ MVN (00, M )
 4:   q (0) = q i−1
 5:   Compute {qq ∗ , p ∗ } = {qq (T ), p (T )} with Algorithm 8.1
 6:   α = exp H({qq i−1 , p i−1 }) − H({qq ∗ , p ∗ })
 7:   With probability min{1, α}, set {qq i , p i } ← {qq ∗ , p ∗ }
 8: end for



     Effective sample size. The effective sample size (ESS) is a metric for measuring
the quality of MCMC samples [23]. Since MCMC samples are correlated, the effective
number of samples will typically be less than the total samples drawn. ESS is defined
in terms of the autocorrelations within the chain as [23]:


                                                  M
(8.1)                             Mef f =         P∞         t
                                            1+2      t=1 ρ

where, M is the total samples drawn and ρt is the autocorrelation at lag t ≥ 0. ρt for
dimension i is defined as:
28                                S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.



                                             Z
                                        1
(8.2)                            ρt =             qic qic+t f (qi ) dqi
                                        σ2   Qi

where, σ is the standard deviation, qic and qic+t are the samples with lag t, and f (.) is
the required distribution. In practice, quantities in the above equation are estimated
from the MCMC samples itself and Equation (8.1) is numerically computed using fast
Fourier transforms in Tensorflow [1]. In this study, we use ESS as a metric to evaluate
the performance of HNNs for Bayesian inference relative to HMC-based sampling.
    Details of L-HNNs. Table 4 presents the architecture and training data details
of L-HNNs.
            Table 4: Details of L-HNNs architecture and training data.

     # Neurons      # HMC samples Error threshold (∆lhnn
                                                     max ) Leap frog samples (Nlf )
                              3D degenerate Rosenbrock
          100           40                    10                      20
                             5-D ill-conditioned Gaussian
          100           40                    10                      20
                             10-D degenerate Rosenbrock
          100           40                    10                      20
                           24-D Bayesian logistic regression
          100           40                    10                      20
                                    100D rough well
          500           40                    20                       5
                                   2-D Neal’s funnel
          100           40                    10                      20
     - All example cases use 3 hidden layers.
     - All example cases use a sine nonlinear activation function.
     - All example cases use 250 units as the end time for HMC samples with ∆t = 0.025.



        500                                              500

        400                                              400

        300                                              300
Count




                                                 Count




        200                                              200

        100                                              100

          0                                                0
                2    1       0   1       2                     2    1       0     1   2
                         Value                                            Value
                     (a)                                                (b)
Fig. 14: Histogram of samples from a 1D Gaussian mixture density using: (a) tradi-
tional NUTS; and (b) HNN-NUTS.
        Additional results.
                       BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                            29




Fig. 15: Scatter plot comparison between NUTS and LHNN-NUTS with online er-
ror monitoring, considering a 5-D ill-conditioned Gaussian distribution. (Blue dots:
traditional NUTS; Red dots: LHNN-NUTS with online error monitoring)
30                                                         S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.




              1.0          NUTS                                          1.0                                                          1.0
                           LHNN-NUTS
              0.8                                                        0.8                                                          0.8
Probability




                                                           Probability




                                                                                                                        Probability
              0.6                                                        0.6                                                          0.6

              0.4                                                        0.4                                                          0.4

              0.2                                                        0.2                                                          0.2

              0.0                                                        0.0                                                          0.0
                    0.4        0.2   0.0   0.2    0.4                               1.0    0.5 0.0 0.5     1.0    1.5                       4   2     0    2   4
                                     q1                                                          q2                                                   q3

              1.0                (a)                                  1.0                      (b)                                                  (c)

              0.8                                                     0.8
Probability




                                                        Probability




              0.6                                                     0.6

              0.4                                                     0.4

              0.2                                                     0.2

              0.0                                                     0.0
                          10     5    0    5     10                            40         20     0    20         40
                                     q4                                                          q5

                                 (d)                                                           (e)
Fig. 16: 5D ill-conditioned Gaussian density empirical cumulative distribution func-
tions comparison.
                       BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                          31




Fig. 17: Scatter plot comparison between NUTS and LHNN-NUTS with online er-
ror monitoring, considering a 10-D degenerate Rosenbrock distribution. (Blue dots:
traditional NUTS; Red dots: LHNN-NUTS with online error monitoring)
32                                            S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.




              1.0      NUTS                                 1.0                                                            1.0
                       LHNN-NUTS
              0.8                                           0.8                                                            0.8
Probability




                                              Probability




                                                                                                             Probability
              0.6                                           0.6                                                            0.6

              0.4                                           0.4                                                            0.4

              0.2                                           0.2                                                            0.2

              0.0                                           0.0                                                            0.0
                      1       0         1                         1.0     0.5 0.0 0.5          1.0     1.5                           1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
                              q1                                                 q2                                                            q3

              1.0         (a)                               1.0                (b)                                         1.0               (c)

              0.8                                           0.8                                                            0.8
Probability




                                              Probability




                                                                                                             Probability
              0.6                                           0.6                                                            0.6

              0.4                                           0.4                                                            0.4

              0.2                                           0.2                                                            0.2

              0.0                                           0.0                                                            0.0
                    1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5                       1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5                                            1         0            1
                               q4                                            q5                                                                    q6

              1.0         (d)                               1.0                (e)                                         1.0               (f)

              0.8                                           0.8                                                            0.8
Probability




                                              Probability




                                                                                                             Probability




              0.6                                           0.6                                                            0.6

              0.4                                           0.4                                                            0.4

              0.2                                           0.2                                                            0.2

              0.0                                           0.0                                                            0.0
                      1      0      1                                 1     0             1        2                             2       0     2        4       6
                              q7                                                     q8                                                        q9

                          (g)                               1.0                (h)                                                           (i)

                                                            0.8
                                              Probability




                                                            0.6

                                                            0.4

                                                            0.2

                                                            0.0
                                                                  0       10      20          30       40
                                                                                 q10

                                                                               (j)
Fig. 18: 10D degenerate Rosenbrock density empirical cumulative distribution func-
tions comparison.
                      BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                         33




Fig. 19: Comparison of scatter plots between NUTS and HNN-NUTS considering a
24D Bayesian logistic regression problem. Dimensions 1 to 12 are presented here.
(blue dots: traditional NUTS; red dots: HNN-NUTS)
34                          S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.




Fig. 20: Comparison of scatter plots between NUTS and HNN-NUTS considering a
24D Bayesian logistic regression problem. Dimensions 13 to 24 are presented here.
(blue dots: traditional NUTS; red dots: HNN-NUTS)
                                                                BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                                                                                                               35




              1.0          NUTS                                                       1.0                                                                           1.0
                           LHNN-NUTS
              0.8                                                                     0.8                                                                           0.8
Probability




                                                                        Probability




                                                                                                                                                      Probability
              0.6                                                                     0.6                                                                           0.6

              0.4                                                                     0.4                                                                           0.4

              0.2                                                                     0.2                                                                           0.2

              0.0                                                                     0.0                                                                           0.0
                      0.1 0.0           0.1 0.2          0.3                                  0.3     0.2    0.1 0.0          0.1     0.2                                       0.1 0.0      0.1    0.2    0.3
                                          q1                                                                   q2                                                                          q3

              1.0                  (a)                                                1.0                   (b)                                                     1.0              (c)

              0.8                                                                     0.8                                                                           0.8
Probability




                                                                        Probability




                                                                                                                                                     Probability
              0.6                                                                     0.6                                                                           0.6

              0.4                                                                     0.4                                                                           0.4

              0.2                                                                     0.2                                                                           0.2

              0.0                                                                     0.0                                                                           0.0
                           0.2               0.0         0.2                                0.2      0.1    0.0        0.1     0.2                                        0.2     0.1 0.0 0.1        0.2   0.3
                                             q4                                                                   q5                                                                     q6

              1.0                  (d)                                                1.0                   (e)                                                     1.0              (f)

              0.8                                                                     0.8                                                                           0.8
Probability




                                                                        Probability




                                                                                                                                                      Probability




              0.6                                                                     0.6                                                                           0.6

              0.4                                                                     0.4                                                                           0.4

              0.2                                                                     0.2                                                                           0.2

              0.0                                                                     0.0                                                                           0.0
                    0.2     0.1        0.0 0.1           0.2                                0.3      0.2    0.1 0.0          0.1     0.2                                  0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
                                          q7                                                                   q8                                                                    q9

              1.0                  (g)                                           1.0                        (h)                                           1.0                        (i)

              0.8                                                                0.8                                                                      0.8
Probability




                                                                   Probability




                                                                                                                                            Probability




              0.6                                                                0.6                                                                      0.6

              0.4                                                                0.4                                                                      0.4

              0.2                                                                0.2                                                                      0.2

              0.0                                                                0.0                                                                      0.0
                     0.2         0.1     0.0       0.1    0.2                          0.2          0.1     0.0 0.1            0.2                                        0.2    0.1 0.0      0.1    0.2
                                          q10                                                                  q11                                                                   q12

                                       (j)                                                                 (k)                                                                    (l)
Fig. 21: 24D Bayesian logistic regression empirical cumulative distribution functions
comparison for dimensions 1 to 12.
36                                                                         S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.




              1.0                                                                          1.0                                                                1.0

              0.8                                                                          0.8                                                                0.8
Probability




                                                                             Probability




                                                                                                                                                Probability
              0.6                                                                          0.6                                                                0.6

              0.4                                                                          0.4                                                                0.4

              0.2                                                                          0.2                                                                0.2

              0.0                                                                          0.0                                                                0.0
                       0.2      0.1        0.0        0.1         0.2                                  0.2           0.0        0.2                                   0.2             0.0             0.2
                                          q13                                                                          q14                                                              q15

              1.0                   (a)                                                    1.0                      (b)                                       1.0                 (c)

              0.8                                                                          0.8                                                                0.8
Probability




                                                                             Probability




                                                                                                                                                Probability
              0.6                                                                          0.6                                                                0.6

              0.4                                                                          0.4                                                                0.4

              0.2                                                                          0.2                                                                0.2

              0.0                                                                          0.0                                                                0.0
                        0.2         0.1         0.0         0.1                                        0.2 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3                                      0.4         0.2           0.0           0.2
                                          q16                                                                    q17                                                                    q18

              1.0                   (d)                                                    1.0                      (e)                                       1.0                 (f)

              0.8                                                                          0.8                                                                0.8
Probability




                                                                             Probability




                                                                                                                                                Probability




              0.6                                                                          0.6                                                                0.6

              0.4                                                                          0.4                                                                0.4

              0.2                                                                          0.2                                                                0.2

              0.0                                                                          0.0                                                                0.0
                              0.2            0.0                  0.2                            0.4          0.2       0.0     0.2                                   0.4       0.2     0.0         0.2      0.4
                                          q19                                                                          q20                                                              q21

              1.0                   (g)                                               1.0                           (h)                             1.0                           (i)

              0.8                                                                     0.8                                                           0.8
Probability




                                                                        Probability




                                                                                                                                      Probability




              0.6                                                                     0.6                                                           0.6

              0.4                                                                     0.4                                                           0.4

              0.2                                                                     0.2                                                           0.2

              0.0                                                                     0.0                                                           0.0
                    0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2                                                             0.2         0.0       0.2                                         0.2     0.0           0.2
                                q22                                                                                  q23                                                          q24

                                    (j)                                                                        (k)                                                              (l)
Fig. 22: 24D Bayesian logistic regression empirical cumulative distribution functions
comparison for dimensions 13 to 24.
                        BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH L-HNNS                             37




Fig. 23: Scatter plot comparison between NUTS and LHNN-NUTS with online error
monitoring, considering a 100-D rough well distribution. As an illustration, 10 of the
100 dimensions are shown. (Blue dots: traditional NUTS; Red dots: LHNN-NUTS
with online error monitoring)
38                           S. L. N. DHULIPALA ET AL.




Fig. 24: Scatter plot comparison between NUTS and LHNN-NUTS with online error
monitoring, considering a 100-D Gaussian distribution with Wishart inverse covari-
ance. As an illustration, 10 of the 100 dimensions are shown. (Blue dots: traditional
NUTS; Red dots: LHNN-NUTS with online error monitoring)
